You, uh, welcome to Governance
and Administration Committee.
Uh, we, um, have asked you here
because we had some questions in relation to some
of the answers provided at our last, um, hearing with you
and the additional follow-up questions
that have been provided.
Uh, I think we've got you here for 20 minutes.
Apologies for being a couple of minutes late starting.
We've just been, uh,
so thank you very much, uh, for joining us.
Um, and we'll jump straight in in, would you like
to make any initial statements
before we jump into questions?
Um, just maybe to introduce ourselves. Yeah.
And so, Tato
or Chin, Stu Black Ta Winger, uh, chief Advisor Asset
and Program Delivery for Foreign Emergency New Zealand.
Um, and shortly, uh, my colleagues introduced himself.
I would, uh, give permission the chair, like to table, uh,
a visual document, which may be useful as we come
through questions, uh, throughout the session.
Yep. Okay. Thank you. Yep.
If you want to, um, end that around, that'd be good.
Uh, Kira, uh, Cole, Ken Cooper took me one.
Uh, Ken Cooper, I'm the National Manager
of Response Capability, uh, a operational firefighter for,
uh, 25 years, uh, responsible for operational policies,
procedures, international national deployments
and our specialist capabilities.
Thank you. You thanks both for joining us. Mm-hmm.
Alright, we'll jump right into questions.
We've got a first question from, um,
Tim Costley, and then we'll go to Lamon. And the thanks
Madam Chair. I'd like to
ask about the 30 man KE chassis
that I've been asking about for the last, um, couple
of review hearings.
And so just for clarity, 'cause you may not have been there.
On the 3rd of December 24, I asked how many
of these appliances were functional and in operational use.
And I was told that it was the majority.
And then in response to further written questions,
in February, 2025, uh, was told by the chief executive,
it was in fact zero.
I asked about that again in the hearing this year on January
the 28th, uh, where the CE apologized
and said he mistook the 47 trucks with cracking
for the specific 30 I'd asked about and then said,
and I quote, there was certainly no intent
to mislead the committee.
And so in direct response to that statement, I asked
for an update on how many trucks were operational at
that time, asking if it was zero, then where are we at now?
And Ms. Stiffler, uh, replied
and I quote, we have 14 that have been handed over
to operational response at this time.
So I asked again in written questions
after the hearing for clarification of those numbers
and which stations those trucks were based at.
And imagine my surprise to be told,
and I quote, none
of the thi manca chassis trucks were in use as
of the 1st of February this year.
How do you explain that?
Um, thank you for the question.
Um, I think,
and just with, uh, permission to chair, I think
to help frame the response, I wonder if it will be helpful
to actually step through the different
No, we'll come to that. I'd
like to know why I was told 14 in the answer is zero.
This is the second time I've been given a number
and it has been completely inaccurate.
And the truth is zero. And
How is that possible?
So I think in terms of the kind of the, how, I think, um,
it was right and proper that we acknowledge,
we have not done a good job in articulating
and explaining what we mean by the different stages
of when we receive a truck coming into the country
and when it becomes operationally ready.
And I'm happy to kind of set through, uh, that,
but I can only just acknowledge the fact,
I think we've just not been clear in
defining the different steps.
So I I appreciate that answer.
That the problem is, and,
and I appreciate maybe you've been thrown under the bus by,
by speaking on behalf of the CE today.
But the problem is that the question I asked was
specifically about trucks and operational use.
And the answer I was given of 14 was directly
after, directly
after I was told there was no intent
to mislead the C committee.
Now, now, uh, experts within FE may op understand
and appreciate the subtle differences between handed over
to operations versus an operational use.
But when I'm asking a direct question about trucks
that are in, uh, on operations,
that's at the very least being a little bit cute
at the other end of the spectrum.
It's being intentionally misleading.
Uh, I think, I think so, would be, it would be good.
We, we have obviously, um, you know, research
and we, we will, we would like the opportunity today
to give you complete transparency
and clarity about the physician of those MEN appliances.
If you are willing to allow, uh, my colleague to give you
that introduction,
I think it will clarify some of your questioning.
Well, we, so we'll get
to the exact state of where we are now.
But the question is, I mean,
we had just been thrown the answers.
It's not the 47 with body cracking.
I want to know how many of the 30 trucks are in
use to then answer.
Uh, well, there's 14 handed to operations.
It looks like you're trying to sidestep the question and,
and maybe give us an answer that
that is not remotely near the truth.
Um, I'd be confident to say there was no intention to
mislead, uh, this committee either kind of in person
or in kind of follow up written responses.
Um, it would just be an error in kind of articulating
where those trucks are.
Uh, and I can explain where they are
and where that kind of journey is from receiving the truck
to becoming operationally ready
and where we are within the acceptance testing cycle. Okay.
And training. So let's, let's step through that.
I, I understand the answer you're giving me.
I don't accept it. I don't think that you can sit here
for the second time, not yourselves,
but in the annual hearing this year and for the second time
after saying there was no intent to mislead you to go,
come out with such an inaccurate answer.
But let's step through because I, I have asked about
where these trucks were at previously in December 24.
I was told at this committee
that they were acquired in 20 18 20 19,
and that the majority were in operational use
in February 25.
You said, actually they were ordered in 2019
and they were delivered between May, 2020 and June, 2021,
and they would all be, uh, delivered
or transferred to operations by the end of
calendar year 2025.
But in the same written answers,
you then said it is actually the 30th of December
of September, 2025
and all would be an operational use
by the 31st of March this year in January this year,
you implied it was 30, delivered 14 in operational use,
16 undergoing acceptance testing and training.
And in the written questions in February this year,
it now says 17 accepted as of November last year.
So the 14 number wasn't even correct. So, so where is it at?
Is it 17? Accepted 14 undergoing acceptance testing,
none on operations.
And they've all been here for six years.
So I think, uh, in response to that, I, I would like
to just frame these 30
against the other type three trucks
that we have in the organization.
'cause I think that's important with respect
to the timeline.
So over the period, uh, 2012 through two 2015,
we, uh, built 47, what we refer to
as type three trucks.
They were built on an MAN cap chassis.
So essentially the kind of skeleton for the truck.
And there was a body built on that truck in 2019
where identified there were some cracks appearing in the
bodies, not in the chassis.
So the organization took the decision to pause
and not build any further, um, kind of components
until we understood what was going on with that body build
and why the cracks were occurring.
That process took longer than expected.
Uh, it involved several experts within New Zealand
and overseas, and two prototypes were built,
one in Australia and one in the United Kingdom.
So we had the 47, and they are on the road today.
And we had these 30 chassis of which two we use
for prototype building.
One in Australia, one, uh, in the United Kingdom.
On the back of that prototyping work, then
a contract was afforded to one
of those two prototype entities,
so Ang Co in the United Kingdom,
and they were commissioned with building 28 more trucks
all on the C chassis.
So again, for clarity, the c chassis has
never experienced any problems.
It was the body build. When we, um,
build a truck, it goes through a series of stages from, uh,
once it is built, it physically comes into New Zealand,
it goes through a process of making sure it is road legal.
It could physically be then handed to foreign emergency
to then undergo all the vision acceptance testing, uh,
and until every single part
of the contract has been satisfied.
So every kind of bit of componentry, every connector until
that is kind of deemed as right
and proper per the contract,
we don't formally accept the truck.
Once we have that truck
and we then go through the process
of things like sign writing, installing all the radios
and communication systems, we can then begin the process
of training our people.
So of the 30 mans, which were kind
of being built in recent time, 16
of those trucks are undergoing training
with our firefighters.
And Ken will be able to speak more to that shortly.
And at this stage, we are on track to have
that training completed for those personnel.
By the end of June meeting those 16 trucks will be available
for operational activities thereafter.
The remaining 14 trucks we're on schedule
to have all the training complete over the
next financial year.
I don't have the kind of the
schedule for that at this stage.
Meaning by the end of the next financial year,
all 30 will be on the road.
And the difference between the 17, which have been
accepted as of the 21st of November last year,
and the 16 you anticipate will be an operational service
by July this year, is that one
of the pilot trial vehicles is never gonna see service?
So, or why, why is there a difference in
That? So I, I think
that's been, unfortunately down to
how the information has been communicated.
There were only ever 30 manca chassis,
which were to be built on.
Of those 31 had a prototype design built in Australia,
one in the UK that left a residual of 20.
But your written answers are clear that there were 17
of the 30 that were accepted as of the 20, uh, 25th
of no, 21st of November last year.
So I can't account for what was put in that document.
So I can apologize that there was an inaccuracy.
Sorry. So discovery answers are wrong as well.
That would be the fifth consecutive time.
We have not been given the right answer by offense,
and it gives me no confidence you're across this issue.
So again, I can only apologize
for the fact if there was information that came through
that was unclear
and ultimately then led to that loss
of confidence I can speak to of the 30
training will be complete for 16 of them by June, the end
of June, this financial year,
and the rest into the next financial year
And all. Okay,
thank you. I'd like to ask a question around the
Breakdowns and in the questions that we've asked, uh,
there is no data capture of of that in terms
of the breakdowns specifically on aerial appliances.
Can you explain why that is the case?
Secondly, uh, you,
apparently there's a new fault management system.
Is that up and running? Uh, and what will that data provide?
So at the moment, we don't have a centralized fault
reporting system in the organization.
We are moving to a new centralized, uh, tool,
which will be not just for trucks,
but for other fault recording, uh,
in other operational parts of the organization.
Um, that build is happening at the moment, uh,
that will provide us with detailed information of,
in the event of a breakdown, what the breakdown is, the kind
of particular componentry parts where, uh, that's kind
of bit of equipment is,
or the truck is with respect to mechanics.
It will carry through all the kind of billing from
that centralized system.
Once that is up
and running, we will then be able to start putting out, uh,
clear kind of statistical building
and identify patterns, uh, across our fleet.
But at this stage, no, we don't have that centralized tool.
Can you provide when the date will be
ready on the centralized
System? Um, I
would need to come back to you after the meeting.
I think we did respond to a recent, uh,
recent parliamentary question, uh, or OIA,
but I don't have the information to hand,
but we can confirm after to this meeting.
My last question is around aerial appliances, given
that they're so important,
depending on the first responders response
and how, where they're needed
and why, um, how is the fire service in terms
of being across that specifically when you've got to have,
uh, you don't have one in a,
a station like thon somewhere close because it's not working
or it's broken down or whatever, and another area
or firetruck has to come from somewhere else.
Given the response time is is really long,
can you just talk a little bit about that?
Yeah, so before I turn to can around the operational side,
uh, what I can speak to is the fact that we are on track
to receive five new aerial appliances between May
and August this year on receipt of those trucks.
We then go through, uh,
that acceptance testing stage are refer to earlier,
which will first of all begin with making sure
that each aerial meets the tractors specification
as outlined before.
We can then move through all the other commissioning
activities and then onto training.
But in terms of how we manage responses and to you,
So obviously The first thing is that operations and
Operational safety
of the firefighters is, is paramount for me.
I'm here representing our operations, uh, team today.
The, we, we Are very clear in terms of
where we position our appliances as risk-based.
Uh, and we need to ensure that we,
our firefighters have the right equipment in
the right place, right time.
And we acknowledge that there are challenges, uh,
with our aerial fleet in terms of its age.
And that's why, uh, we have a replacement program, uh,
that will come into place this year.
Our officers are trained, uh, to, uh, when they, uh,
arrive at an incident, uh, if the selected tactics,
primary selected tactics are not available to them,
they shift to, uh, a secondary tactic to, um, you know,
ensure the safety of the occupants
or a safety of the firefighters, uh, is paramount.
Uh, so certainly acknowledge we've got some challenges
with our fleet aerial fleets in terms
of its, uh, serviceability.
Uh, we move appliances around the country to ensure
that our network does support, uh, our frontline.
Um, but we, we heavily rely on, uh, our offices
to take the right decisions at incidents.
And last, Last, that's fine. Will, uh, the
Aerial appliances, will they all be funded
In terms? Yes. So the,
the five that are on track to be delivered
between May and August of this year shoved
and I should say that is please subject to kind
of global kinda shipping challenges
and things at the moment, uh, for those
that are coming from overseas, but they are
fully funded. Yes.
Thank you Foster. Yeah, look, um, thanks very much.
Um, first one of those,
the first question is just the lead time to get from,
so we'll, we'll deal with the 30, um, man, um, uh, vehicles
that, uh, we've been talking about first lead time from when
you first ordered paid for them, you know,
actually getting 'em on on the road.
So in terms of, I mean, there's two kind of big, uh,
or maybe even three lead windows.
First of all, there's the going from
identifying there's a requirement for a next generation
or a new type of truck.
Um, like respectfully that takes as long as it takes to work
through, uh, across all our operational
14 years in this case, uh, to understand
what the operational requirements are.
Yeah. Uh, to then explore
how they are best met and achieved.
Sometimes that can lead to kind of prototyping, uh,
of particular kind of trucks and appliances.
And then from there, following those prototyping may lead
to the, uh, lodgement of an, of an order.
Um, typically once we get to the point of saying,
this is the confirmed thing that we want
and we're satisfied, that can be upwards of two years, uh,
before we, uh, potentially receive, um, a truck.
That of course is always kind
of predicated on engineering challenges.
Um, pressures just in kind of production timelines with,
with kind of, uh, entities and so on.
And then when we receive that truck, we then need to go
through that acceptance phase
to actually make sure it is meeting
the contracted window. And that
Sounds like about six months or so.
It can vary. It depends literally on the complexity
of the truck, the, for the MAs,
when in 2019 we became aware of
the cracking appearing in the trucks, the decision was taken
to pause, building on the residual 30 man chassis, uh,
that process to understand what was going on
and what the solution, uh, would be took longer than,
uh, was anticipated.
But that was due to the kind of complex nature, uh,
of the truck design.
And I think it's, uh, important.
We acknowledge, uh,
that when we are talking about purchasing, um, a firetruck,
we are not purchasing like a car from a dealership.
Uh, they are incredibly complex, uh, machines,
be it in terms of physical design through to cabling
and configurations, and it can take a long time.
So bearing all that in mind, the number
of trucks you've got in the entire fleet is 1600? Yeah,
About about 1500.
1500, yeah. Okay. And they've got a lifespan of roughly
Between 20 and 25 years.
Okay. So you're gonna be replacing 750 odd, uh, sorry, uh,
75 odd a year.
Mm-hmm. Roughly.
So how does, I'm, I'm really trying, struggling to work out.
It's take takes this length of time to get those,
these particular 30 we're talking about.
Yeah. And yet you've got, you need about, you know,
roughly 75 a year.
How do that, how do you square those?
So you actually have trucks which are,
and you know, you've said a lot about
asset management plans mm-hmm.
That you actually have a fleet that's purpose
year on year out, and it's not
getting older and older and older.
So, uh, we've previously, the,
the organization's previously spoken
to the select committee, uh, about the age of our fleet.
Yep. Roughly 30%, uh, of our fleet is at life
or coming to towards end of life. Um,
So 500 odd vehicles.
We spend, um, a year,
roughly 20 million year on year.
Uh, I think we have previously
been cleared before the committee.
Um, that, uh, in terms of from a financial point of view,
uh, our annual investments, uh, essentially in,
in our truck space, uh, we obviously as with all kind
of organizations have finite capital budget.
Uh, that allows us to largely kind of hold a line.
It's not allowing us to keep up.
We've been clear, uh,
that based on the current spend profile
and budget availability, as we look over the next 10 years,
there is insufficient budget to actually bring our fleet up
to the desired standard.
So what we've heard is we've talked about 47,
which you've obviously fixed the cracking on 30,
but five aerial appliances you're talking about.
But the, that doesn't anywhere near keep you up with
what you need to be purchasing.
So you must be doing a lot of other acquisition
or the fleet is getting older.
So yeah, so the, the fleet is getting old.
Um, you know, as I'd say we are sitting at current about
30%, uh, of our fleet is at life or closer life.
Um, the way we are having to address that is
through accommodation of increasing our maintenance costs.
So our operating budget needs
to obviously accommodate, uh, for that.
Uh, and we also look to, uh, cascade
or move our appliances, uh, around the country.
And that is based on looking at kind
of mileage usage and things like that.
Thank you. So we are just, uh, almost outta time.
I know Melissa Lee's got a supplementary
and I do have, um, if you are willing,
just two final questions from, from members. So
Melissa Lee, thank you.
Um, just quick clarification I guess, uh,
I'm looking at your chart
and actually says in 20 14, 17 47 type three were, uh,
chassis and bodies were actually received
and you actually found the crack in October November, 2019.
So were all these 47 actually in
operation, it took three years.
So it would've gone through all
of the testings they were actually, um, um,
on the road being operational and that you found the cracks.
So between, um, up through to about 2015, uh,
we introduced into service the 47 trucks.
Yeah. Again, just to be clear, the uh, man cab chassis,
so the main kind of bare bones
of the truck has not experienced, uh, any cracking.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. In 2019,
that was when we started receiving report reports from
operational personnel
of cracks appearing within the body build.
At that point, we commissioned two things.
One was to kind of explore what the fix could be, so that,
and secondly we paused Yeah.
Building anymore until we could understand the problem
and identify a potential solution going forward,
Right? So from then, it
actually has taken until 2026
and we still don't have those actually in operation.
So when you actually look at the timeline from when it
actually first began, 2012 to 26, that's 14 years.
In the meantime, all of the trucks and the bodies
and whatever you've actually, um, ordered
and paid for, it is now old.
It's decades old
and you're still actually trying to fix something
that has actually, you know,
hasn't actually worked or whatever.
And you know, to me it just seems ridiculous
that you've actually got old trucks that is actually,
you know, operational.
These are not even actually operational.
Even when you get it all fixed up, it's not gonna, you know,
it's gonna take time In the meantime,
everything's getting old
and we are gonna have to upgrade them all.
So technology moves really, really fast.
Why is it that fence can't move that fast?
So the trucks we operate in the organization have a
lifespan of between 20 and 25 years.
There is a distinction between the age of the chassis
and the age of the truck.
IE what we build on that chassis.
It is not uncommon for chassis to have been available
for a period of time before something is built on it,
be it cars, commercial trucks.
Were in this case, uh, fire trucks.
Um, we have been clear, uh, I think today
and for previous committees, uh,
that we are operating an aging fleet.
Uh, around 30% of our trucks are at life for end of life.
And from a financial point of view, we don't have the money
to then do wholesale upgrades.
We can do a year by year controlled upgrade
and introduce into service,
but we are running against, uh, a backward
Cloth. Well, you would've had
the money to afford those 47
to be delivered and you found it faulty.
What's actually happened to the insurance
or the claims back to the manufacturers?
So in terms of the issue with the cracks,
which were identified in the body build on the initial 47,
I'm not currently positioned to go into that
'cause that's being worked through
between ourself and another party.
But in terms of that's 16.
But in terms of the new truck, so we got identified in 2019,
there was a, an issue with the body build.
It took two years to work through the solution to see
what the possible options were.
We then have to go through the necessary procurement process
to then point somebody to construct,
you are then working in a global kind of market in a sense
for production timelines.
And then on receipt of those trucks as previous mentioned,
we then go through the,
Have you gone back to the manufacturers
for the faulty uh, chassis,
Which Was actually, you know, at the
trust, whatever it was.
Yeah. So I think it is very important.
There, there is no issue with the chassis. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
The trust. Yeah, we continue to work with the bodybuilder
who was involved with the first 47.
That's an ongoing matter.
Okay. Sorry, we might just have to cut that off.
So Mike has opportunity to
quickly ask his question then. Yeah,
It'll be final. Be quick.
It's just follow up from, from Tim Costley, um,
not about the appliances, but actually about I guess
information that we're getting from senior firms officials
in here that turns out not to be correct.
So I, I asked a question around o overtime, um,
during the last hearing, and it was,
the answer I got was on a 24 7 roster.
That means we have to backfill
that vacancies at double time.
And then, uh, written parliamentary question, uh,
the minister was advised that no firefighters are paid
double time whilst working overtime hours.
So I just want to confirm which one's correct.
Like where were we told when we were told double
time in the hearing.
Was that incorrect?
I think like respectfully on that one,
I need to take that question away.
It is not an area that I'm across. So
One, hopefully this is one then another follow up.
Um, Tim was also asking, I followed up around the, um,
new recruits getting life fire, fire training, um,
and the officials said, um,
when I asked them could she confirm
that all new recruits have been through life fire training.
Is that correct? Down said yes.
Are you able to confirm that all new Korea
and volunteer firefighter recruits have
had live fire training?
Again, I'm sorry, in the sense of,
for this particular hearing in the sense of where we are,
I'll need to take that question away for you.
Okay. Thank, thank you. And just final clarification.
Yeah, I just wanna clarify the,
the last answer I was given
and I just wanna acknowledge
that these are maybe difficult questions and,
and you weren't the ones giving us the answers,
uh, in person here.
And, and I would've expected the chief executive
to be here today to answer for himself.
But with respect to the map you've given us
and the answers we've been given, and we see tranche one
and tranche two, tranche two starting at December, 2023,
I'm just referring to, um, post hearing question number 97,
where it, it, it goes through the timeline.
And actually the first accepted vehicle arrived in
October, 2023, the second, um,
the second in September, 2024.
And then it further 15 were accepted on the
21st of November, 2025.
The remaining 13 have not yet been accepted.
So that's 17, accepted as of November last year.
13 remaining in written question 97,
you've told me it's actually 16 and 14.
I want to be really clear about which
one of those is correct. So
To be very clear, it is 16 and 14.
I think there was just, and,
and again, uh, I can't speak to comments
provided, uh, prior other than I anticipate
or assume that it's around the language of when
as an organization we've kind
of received something versus when it's actually gone
through the proper, uh, acceptance testing.
And I think just in documentation,
we have blurred that over time.
But as of today, we have 16 trucks
that have undergone acceptance testing
that are either receiving training right now
or scheduled for training.
And at this stage, we'll be ready for operational use
by the end of June, this financial year.
Thank you very much for that.
Thank you for joining us today. We appreciate you weren't,
um, at our previous hearing.
And so just acknowledge, um, thank you for,
for facing us today, answering some of those questions.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.